# Type Inference

StableHLO was originally bootstrapped from
[the MHLO dialect](https://github.com/tensorflow/mlir-hlo#meta-hlo-dialect-mhlo),
and it inherited the MHLO implementation of type inference. The implementation
progress is tracked in
[status.md](https://github.com/openxla/stablehlo/blob/main/docs/status.md).

The proposed guidelines below are intended to ensure the implementation of
high-quality verifiers and shape functions for StableHLO ops.

## Proposal

These proposals apply to both revisiting existing implementations, and achieving
new ops until a comprehensive coverage.

### (P1) Use the StableHLO spec as the source of truth

The [spec](https://github.com/openxla/stablehlo/blob/main/docs/spec.md) is the
source of truth for all verifiers and shape functions of the StableHLO ops. The
existing verifiers and shape functions of every op need to be revisited to be
fully aligned with the specification. Note that the specification document keeps
evolving. In cases where the spec for an op is not available, the XLA
implementation should be used as the source of truth instead, including
[xla/service/shape\_inference.cc](https://github.com/openxla/xla/blob/main/xla/service/shape_inference.cc)
and [xla/service/hlo\_verifier.cc](https://github.com/openxla/xla/blob/main/xla/service/hlo_verifier.cc).
The XLA implementation doesn't cover unbounded dynamism, so for unbounded
dynamism we'll apply common sense until the dynamism RFC is available.

### (P2) Make the most of ODS

ODS files (like
[StablehloOps.td](https://github.com/openxla/stablehlo/blob/main/stablehlo/dialect/StablehloOps.td))
define ops with traits and types for each operand/attribute/result and will
do the verifications. Thus NO verification code is needed in the verifiers or
shape functions for the properties which are already guaranteed by the ODS.
Remove the verification code if duplicated with ODS, as they will never be
triggered.

Do we need to add tests for the constraints from the ODS? Please see
[Establish testing guidelines](#testing-guidelines).

### (P3) Maintain verification code in verifiers and shape functions

Both:

- **verifiers**: implemented by `Op::verify()`, and
- **shape functions**: implemented by `InferTypeOpInterface`s like
  `Op::inferReturnTypes()` or `Op::inferReturnTypeComponents`

may have verification code to check operands/attributes/results. An initial
split might be as follows: Let the verifiers check the operands/attributes, then
let shape functions only calculate inferred result types and check the
compatibility against the real result types. However, in reality this split has
a few problems:

- The shape function can be called by the autogenerated `build()` functions,
  without calling the verifier first. So the related inputs must be verified
  in the shape function as well.
- Duplicated code: For example in verifiers we do some processing on the
  operands and then verify some intermediate results. Then in shape functions
  these intermediate results are useful for inferring the final results. These
  intermediate results have to be calculated twice.
- Maintenance burden: Verifications of an op are contained in two different
  methods.

The solution is as follows:

1. **For most ops without regions** (like `PadOp`): Try to put all the verification
   code into the shape functions, and discard verifiers totally. In cases where
   this isn't possible due to the inability to infer return types
   (such as with`ReshapeOp` or `BroadcastInDimOp`), create a verifier to
   contain the necessary verification logic. Typically inferable ops,
   like `AddOp`, may still need a verifier to perform additional verifications,
   because they are verifying constraints of a provided return type, which
   is not accessible in the type/shape inference methods.

2. **For ops with regions** (like `ReduceOp/IfOp`; a full list is
   [here](https://github.com/openxla/stablehlo/pull/401)): The autogenerated
   builders don't take regions as parameters, so if these builders involve type
   inference, then the shape function will be called with empty regions (see
   [this example](https://github.com/tensorflow/mlir-hlo/blob/129ae36971a9e3e110d8b91b91a150942d13ff81/mhlo/transforms/mhlo_canonicalize_reduction/mhlo_canonicalize_reduction.cc#L221)).

   1. If the regions are not needed for type inference (like `ReduceOp`), put
      the region related verification logic in verifiers instead of the shape
      functions. Duplicate some code if it is inevitable.

   2. If the regions are needed for type inference (`IfOp/CaseOp/MapOp`), then
      additionally the shape function must verify the regions are not empty
      explicitly, even though the ODS may already guarantee its existence in
      the Op definition.

<a id="testing-guidelines"></a>

### (P4) Establish testing guidelines

**Do we need to add/maintain tests for verifications that are covered by ODS?**

We do not. The tests should focus on the verifiers and shape functions, while
changes to ODS need a revisit of this op.

But stay careful about the missing pieces: for example, if the op contains the
trait `SameOperandsAndResultShape`, which checks only shapes but not element
type, then the verification for element types of operands/results still needs
tests.

**Where do we put tests for verifiers and type inference?**

[ops\_stablehlo.mlir](https://github.com/openxla/stablehlo/blob/main/stablehlo/tests/ops_stablehlo.mlir)
contains the positive cases of ops, and (at least) 1 negative test for every
verification error. It is also able to check that the inferred return type
is **compatible** with (not the same as!) the real result type.

[infer\_stablehlo.mlir](https://github.com/openxla/stablehlo/blob/main/stablehlo/tests/infer_stablehlo.mlir)
verifies the existence of the shape function of an op by line with
`hlo_test_infer.get_return_type_components"(%x):...` and checks that the
inferred type matches exactly as expected. One positive test per op in general.

#### What to do

When implementing or revisiting the verifier and/or shape function of an op:

1. Put all positive cases and negative cases in
   [ops\_stablehlo.mlir](https://github.com/openxla/stablehlo/blob/main/stablehlo/tests/ops_stablehlo.mlir).

2. Add a single positive test in
   [infer\_stablehlo.mlir](https://github.com/openxla/stablehlo/blob/main/stablehlo/tests/infer_stablehlo.mlir)
   to test the interface.

3. (Optional) If an op is complicated and could contain a lot of tests, consider
   adding a separate test file named `verify_<op_name>.mlir` or
   `verify_<your_topic>.mlir` within the same folder.

Note: For now, the tests for new **bounded dynamism / sparsity** are also put in
[infer\_stablehlo.mlir](https://github.com/openxla/stablehlo/blob/main/stablehlo/tests/infer_stablehlo.mlir).
